Now, this will be just a blurp/rant of mine, and it’s something I’ve been thinking about the past week. And when I say it’ll be short, I mean this blog post is currently written in one go (blame my computer’s slow loading and my brain being kinda tired).

I was just doing some illustrations these days, doing my assignments, the usual stuff, all the while listening to my motivational playlist. Surprisingly, I just now figured I found great motivation in listening to anime openings/soundtracks or just to motivational music with anime visuals. The weirder part is that the last time I actually watched anime was almost a year ago, and even then I wasn’t really that keen on binging shows. And yet, I think there is some special characteristic to this genre of content that makes it so popular and makes it an integral part of our aesthetic preferences even years later.

First of all, what struck me as most obvious, is how characters in anime shows like Naruto, One Piece, etc. usually struggle against a plethora of villains and manage to unleash their powers in epic battles. However, as in other pieces of fiction, the winner of the fight is rarely determined based on power levels alone. The so-called “plot-armor “ comes into play way too often, and thus the main character manages to overcome seemingly every hardship, even if barely. I think this occurs for two reasons. 1. Obviously the main character losing would be very disappointing to everybody. 2. More importantly, the main character is often supposed to be relatable to the viewer, and the viewer is kind of meant to be able to put themselves in their shoes. Thus, the viewer can be taken along for the journey, rooting for their hero and going forward.

Now, this is where the contrast with real life comes in. We don’t fight the same battles as Naruto and Luffy do, sadly or not so. We also meet everyday struggles of some kind, but they’re rarely that flashy, and more often than not are mental, not physical at all. I guess sports make an exception, where you literally want to win by being better and stronger than your opponent(s), but in general, us doing our daily tasks is not this case. From what I observe in myself, it just feels better to romanticize the moment, in order to not feel as if it is the endlessly boring thing it often is. For example, while I’m writing this article, I’m also listening to an anime soundtrack, and it helps me feel the process of writing as something much more enjoyable. Even if the conscious part of my brain is busy with spitting words on the page, my subconscious is free to imagine epic fights and scenarios with a great soundtrack and visuals.

Another point that I believe anime has covered, unlike most other types of media, is how the characters manage to overcome most of their enemies and hardships mainly through personal willpower and determination, and after rigorous training. It is simultaneously a bit overused as a trope, and something the viewer rarely gets tired of. We are all underdogs in our stories, even if we come from a bit more privileged background and didn’t need to do it all on our own, so naturally, we’re inclined to root for the underdog protagonist! They usually start off not being too strong, maybe they show a hint of potential, just like all of us when we’re at the beginning of any project or when we’re just beginners in any skill. It just makes sense to transform our belief in ourselves into something a bit more colorful and vivid, and this is probably why so many anime series resonate so well with both kids, young adults, and full-fledged adults alike. 

Anyway, maybe I am just trying to rationalise the fact I still enjoy anime as much as I did back when I used to watch it more extensively, and since I know at least part of the people reading this blog are also anime-watchers, I felt you would enjoy the topic. So what do you think, is anime only for teens and why is it still so enjoyable years later?