Do you consider yourself to be part of the creative field or do you think of yourself more as a science-y person? What if I told you that we all have a bit of both in us?

There is a wide gap in our society between the people in art-related professions and people who are more mathematically or scientifically interested. I personally happen to be in touch with both sides, but that hasn’t always been the case. Ever since I started showing interest in academics, it has become a bigger influence on my life than any sort of art form could have been. And it wasn’t out of personal preference either, it was just obviously a lot more valued in society. Creative endeavors didn’t seem to get you far, except if you were exceptionally gifted. And I was just a kid with a knack for maths, who somehow also happened to enjoy drawing Pokemon. It was kinda obvious which road would get me further career-wise. However, if I had only pursued success academically and never tried going back to the arts, I wouldn’t be writing this blog post right now. 

In a world far too dark for creative people to be taken seriously, it becomes a great challenge to choose the not-so-traveled path. Even though there are numerous examples of people becoming very successful and fulfilled pursuing art in any form, there will always be this stigma that they are somehow outliers, exceptions to some sort of global rule. What I believe, and what I will be defending in this article, is the opinion that people can be in touch with both their artistic side and their less-creative interests and talents, even if they seem immeasurably unrelated. There must be a reason why painting, singing, and writing are among the most common forms of therapy and mediation for people too stressed out in this already overly stressful world.

## Categorization is Pulling Us Apart

People love to put others, and themselves, in boxes. The clearer the label, the easier you’d be perceived, which apparently is important. It is difficult to imagine a person as being something more than a one-dimensional character, in possession of multiple outlets for their complicated soul. From some unspecified point onward, you have to be put in a box, and it’s dubious who is more (un)lucky - the kid with the sketchbook being pressured into studying law, the kid with an affinity for singing and music but lacking the talent to be the best, or the kid who was never pushed into having a non-academic hobby, and grew up with zero outlets for their stress and frustration. This great divide between “art people“ and all the others has been artificially created as generations went by, and people tend to forget that Da Vinci was both an inventor and a painter.

We are rarely built to be streamlined in just one niche. The whole concept of the left and right hemisphere of the brain is mostly a poorly-understood metaphor to further the concept of people being either this or that, never both. Yes, we are all very different from each other and we can be compared based on a number of objective and subjective spectrums, there is competition in every sphere out there. But in the general sense, we can agree that the basics of the universal human experience are not so related to a shared concept of math or language, but more so to a uniquely human expression of emotion, both positive and negative. By further developing our openness to art and the creative front, we can increase our chances of feeling more connected to our innermost selves. Here are a few takes on how we are more connected and alike than you might anticipate:

## 1. Engineers are inherently creative

This may seem like the farthest of stretches since most people plunge into these careers/uni courses with the idea that they will study tons of maths, physics, mechanics, everything non-creative you can imagine. Thus, it’s a bit counter-intuitive that such a science-based field has so much to do with the creative process. However, it’s exactly through one of my classes on “Engineering Design and Modelling“ that I even came up with the idea for this blog post. Turns out that to come up with any sort of engineering solution, and to create a simulation/model of it, you need to follow a process more or less similar to what you do when you want to produce a creative work of any kind. Think about it, you start with the brainstorming bit, where you try to put the pieces of your knowledge so far in place, see if they fit together, and mix and remix those combinations until a suitable one appears. If engineering was as uninspired as most people think, then everything would have already been invented - that is, if it all came up to applying a formula and sticking to the method. There’s a lot more trial and error involved, and some of the most brilliant solutions are actually as inspired as many artistic masterpieces. The plane design, for example, takes large inspiration from birds and other avians. Observing nature and imitating it is something inherently human, and both creatives and non-creatives indulge.

## 2. Artists are problem-solvers

On the other side of the coin - artists also have a bit of both yin and yang in themselves. As much as an engineering draft can resemble an artist’s sketch, the same can be said for the opposite. When you have a creative medium, it is just a tool, like any other - it needs intent behind it, some point you want to make, a message you want to share with others. An illustration is just one way to convey such a message. Any sort of visual medium, or any other for the matter, can provoke a strong emotion in someone, possibly moving them into action even. Well, if you want to provoke this action, you need to think like a problem solver. You follow the steps. You choose the best colours, the best shapes, the best lines, and as much as art can be considered subjective, there are some objective trendlines it often follows, such as perspective, colour theory, etc. So as much as any artist wouldn’t wanna admit it, a drawing is a whole process, and a near-scientific one as well.

## 3. We are all builders

There are different people reading this blog, both those actively pursuing something artistic and those who are very far from it. In both cases, what makes us human is the desire to build something. An object, a tool, an experience, an emotion. Create something from semingly nothing, make lasting memory of the temporary turbulence in our brains, turn that vigorous excitement of creativity into a line in the sand, a lasting impact of a momentary vision. 

And when we pursue these inherent instincts to create, in one form or another, we are true to ourselves. Even now, writing this blog, I feel determined and motivated to pass on my message. Just an hour later I’ll probably be studying for university, most probably be less motivated, but I would still do it out of this same wish to do something useful, albeit in the long term. So, as a final sentence for this surprisingly poetic blog post, we can all dig a little deeper and explore our creative sides, in order to make our life more interesting, and our souls a bit more vibrant.