There are always 24 hours in an given day, out of which we sleep for approximately 8, then work/study/both for about 8 more, we usually spend an hour or two in commute, a minute here and there spent in cooking, eating, browsing social media, and so on and so on and so on… In the end, what usually happens is that our creative work, usually left for our spare time, gets forgotten, as we often don’t have neither the time nor energy left for it. However, by the means of good organisation and planning ahead, you can gain some extra time AND energy for the work that truly moves you!

## Strategy #1: Think about your energy throughout the day!

Most people have commented throughout the years of feeling their energy reserves decreasing through the course of the day. It makes sense that we usually don’t have energy for creating art in the end of the day, even though we often have an hour or two to spare right before bed time. However, as is the case with myself included, your creative energy is not sufficient, your eyes tend to get tired and irritated more easily and in the end you may either draw something sub-optimal, or just abandon a piece mid-drawing, cause you’re not really feeling it.

Thus, it makes the more sense to prioritise your creative endeavours for the early morning, if your schedule allows it, because you are most alert, most energised, and mainly more inspired. What is more, it can become a great start of the day! When I manage to get my daily illustration checked off my to-do list, it gets me pumped to do all my other errands, knowing I have already unleashed my more creative side once during the day, and I can take a look at my drawing for motivation - if I managed to draw that for an hour in the morning, surely I can power through a few more Zoom lectures.

## Strategy #2: Try to batch tasks if you can!

Especially for students right now, with distant learning and everything, it can be hard in the beginning to get accustomed to the “freelance“ lifestyle. You think “Yeah, I only have this small assignment for the day, I have time.“ and then you spend most of the day procrastinating because you can just start and finish it up in 30 minutes, right? As it often happens to me, whatever task I leave for after 9 pm often doesn’t even get started, so I take a different approach.

Batching would mean simply categorising your tasks and doing them in a specific order that takes the least amount of recalibration throughout the day. Once you sit down to write, you don’t want to get up to the other room to clean or anything, because them you would have to sit down and get back into the creative mood again - which inevitably costs energy. The more you think about your stamina in video game terms, the more you grow to appreciate it, and no amount of coffee will help if you keep on inefficiently distributing your strength. The less distractions there are, the more you can fall into the amazing state of flow, which allows you to produce deep, quality work.

## Strategy #3: Check how much time you spend on your social media
 
It may often sound like a burden. but it true that the time spent browsing through Instagram can definitely be utilised better. Even your daily commute to uni/work can be spent in a more wholesome and productive manner - you can try listening to a podcast, reading a book, or even going through some lecture notes on your phone (the perks of writing your uni stuff digitally xD). There are lost of there small 5-minute slots throughout the day, which we often neglect, but when they compound, it turns out that it is a large missed opportunity. It usually takes a lot of time to study/work out/be productive or creative, but kickstarting this habit usually takes a second - just sit down and boot up your computer, just dress n your workout clothes, etc etc. The more buffer we put between us and the start of a good habit, the more friction appears, and the harder it gets to make them stick. 

So, try limiting your time on social media apps, or, even better, try to consume more responsibly. What I have tried is to only “Save“ the Instagram posts that put value in my life, and then categorise them with labels. You can also try using your Instagram (if you are currently an artist trying to promote their work) as a video game of sorts, trying to gain more followers, exploring different hashtags and overall seek other posts that may inspire you! Mindfulness is key!

## Strategy #4: If you don’t have the time still, do [Art in Stages](../art-in-stages)! 

As I mentioned in one of my previous blog posts, we often think we need to finish a whole artwork in one sitting. Not only is this very time-consuming, it is also not always necessary. We need to better adjust to the skill of ending the work session successfully, saving our files and writing down our ideas or where exactly we should start off the next time we resume the creative process. The more confident we feel in our ability to continue at a later date, the less stress we put on the notion of ending the task t o d a y.
 
Again, I hope you found this article useful! ^^ There are lots of other things you can do to make more time in your day for art, but these are some keystone concepts that can get you rolling on your self-development journey! Keep up the good work and till next week! ❤