Near the end of 2020, I reached a rather critical point in the development of my art profile. I was really wondering how to continue, what art do I wanted to keep on making, what was holding me back, what strategies do I need to construct going forward, all that jazz. And I think that when at a crossroad like this, you can A) take a step back and assess the situation and B) go headfirst into the unknown and find out.

However, when I thought about it, if I just kept on posting what I felt like, I would feel so so confused all the time, and my attention would be further diverted to thinking “What should I post today?“ every single day. This is why I decided to create a very abstract, but still realistic, roadmap to my success as an artist in 2021, here’s what I did.

As you may expect, it all starts with a blank canvas. Before you take a step in the right direction, you first need to realise what the different directions are, on a most basic level. That said, a little bit of spontaneity and improvisation here and there would not hurt at all, and would even make you feel more excited about your creative endeavours. Still, I think we all need a general sense of direction, a sense of alignment with our goals, to eventually get closer to them. And I realised for myself, that it would be impossible to create a posting schedule till the end of the year, it would just be too much effort - however, what I could do, is think about the routines I can do day to day, week to week, month to month, that as a result will push me the way I want to go. Because believe me, as much as I don’t like it, my default state isn’t “action”, and I surely need a system of sorts, a safety net, so when I feel tired and not in the creative flow at all, I have something I can rely on, to still get the results on time.

In my specific case, this made me think “How would I want my profile to look like a year from now?“. I searched through the portfolios of other artists, to figure out what I wanted to change in the style of my personal aesthetics, and as you may have noticed, [there is quite the change in the general feeling of the things I post from a given point onward](https://www.instagram.com/kofiscrib). I figured out that Instagram’s format allowed me to make a template - I could post a few thematic posts (the monthly theme was something I had decided on beforehand), and I could fit in the posts for “Creative Virgo“ every 6 days as well, all the while retaining a pleasantly looking feed. Instagram is just one example, I plan on putting in more effort into my Patreon, creating a schedule for it, as well as for the occasional commission work, so I always know what I will draw at the beginning of the day.
 
This leads me to the best part of having a plan - you wake up and don’t really have to waste precious morning energy into deciding what you’ll do today. You just look at the schedule, see “Today I have to draw X, Y, and Z“ and you start, not really wandering by yourself into the sea of uncertainty (God, that was poetic as hell). It lifts that mental burden off your shoulders, the same way preparing your outfit the night before, and you can use your increased mental concentration throughout the day into taking a bit more important decisions.

Because honestly, preparing a to-do list doesn't save that much time by itself, but reducing the friction every time you try to do a task, or switch between doing tasks, can overall account for a pretty seamless workflow, and you’ll most likely get much more done, than if you paused every five minutes to take a new decision. I recently came to the realisation that multi-tasking sounds great only in theory, but when personally try it out, I end up with a bunch of unfinished tasks, little progress made on each of them, increasingly more friction when I switch from one task to the other and so on. It has been shown numerous times that the illusion of multi-tasking comes down to you just switching between tasks faster and faster, which can take a great toll on your mental energy, compared with the scenario where you just sit down and write, like I’ve been doing in this 1-hour slot (okay, I ended up snacking and browsing social media for a while, but we’re all human).

Another key point to my concept of a roadmap to success is the idea of projects. In my case, “becoming a better artist“ is the general goal, but with it sounding just like this abstract blob, I will probably not get far. So under that, in my New Year resolution list, I started writing what exactly I want to do. What is a “better artist“? What am I lacking in currently, how should I exercise? I found out that I need to gather better references for my drawings, to experiment more with the facial expressions of my characters, to try more often to tell a story with just a few drawings, as opposed to a single picture with loads of text under it. After all, a picture tells a thousand words, so I will definitely be veering in the direction of adding more details in the drawing as opposed to simply making more vibrant characters.
 
So going back to my point, projects can act both as subtasks of your grand vision, and as milestones, after the completion of which you can pat yourself on the back. Often we may find ourselves on the right road to our imagined success, but when we do not reward ourselves at the right intervals, we can lose focus and default to doing nothing and once again wondering why we didn’t progress at all? Take it one step at a time, one daily drawing, one daily to-do list at a time, and let the compound effect do its job. 

To end this blog post, I’ll leave you with a quote from one of my favourite books, “7 Habits of Highly Effective Teens“ by Sean Covy, on the topic of habit building:

> “I am the servant of all great individuals and, alas, of all failures, as well. Those who are great, I have made great. Those who are failures, I have made failures…
> Who am I?
> I am Habit.“